SOURCE: https://www.morganlewis.com/pubs/2026/08/algorithmic-rent-pricing-litigation-expands-under-new-state-and-local-laws
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 22:12 UTC
CAPTURE: manual, built-in browser page text; table whitespace collapsed to one cell per line (supplemental; secondary source; same URL as manifest D002/D037, which are link-only)

Algorithmic Rent-Pricing Litigation Expands Under New State and Local Laws
LAWFLASH
ALGORITHMIC RENT-PRICING LITIGATION EXPANDS UNDER NEW STATE AND LOCAL LAWS
August 21, 2026

A new wave of litigation focused on violations of municipal regulations is emerging against multifamily housing landlords, many of whom are facing antitrust litigation targeting their use of certain revenue management products. The new regulations may potentially provide a simpler path to liability and the possibility of significant penalties.

Following federal, state, and private litigation targeting RealPage, Yardi, and landlords that allegedly used revenue-management products, states and municipalities across the country have enacted laws restricting the use of algorithms or price optimization software to share or recommend rents, concessions, lease terms, or occupancy levels. These laws often authorize enforcement through a combination of private rights of action and public enforcement mechanisms, which has led to a new wave of litigation.

A San Francisco tenant filed Gomez v. Greystar Management Services LLC in the Northern District of California, alleging that Greystar violated San Francisco Administrative Code § 37.10C through its alleged use of RealPage and Yardi products. The ordinance prohibits landlords from using qualifying algorithmic devices that calculate nonpublic competitor information to advise on rent or occupancy. Each month of use for each affected dwelling unit may constitute a separate violation, and tenants may seek damages, injunctive relief, and civil penalties of up to $1,000 per violation. S.F. Admin. Code § 37.10C(b) and (d).
A San Diego tenant filed Keller v. UDR Inc. in the Southern District of California under San Diego Municipal Code § 98.1103, alleging that UDR improperly used RealPage products. San Diego similarly authorizes tenant suits for damages, injunctive relief and penalties of up to $1,000 per violation, with each month and affected rental property potentially constituting a separate violation. San Diego Mun. Code §§ 98.1103(b) & 98.1104(a).

LOCAL REGULATION IS QUICKLY EXPANDING

Municipal regulation relating to the use of algorithmic pricing tools to set rental prices in multifamily housing has developed quickly, but not uniformly. Some regulations supplement existing antitrust law, while others create landlord-specific prohibitions and direct tenant remedies. Definitions of prohibited data and services also differ, as do the availability of private actions, statutory damages, and fee shifting.

Jurisdiction
Ordinance
Status/Principal Feature

San Francisco, CA
S.F. Admin. Code § 37.10C (effective October 2024)
Prohibits qualifying algorithmic devices using nonpublic competitor data; private tenant claims and up to $1,000 per violation, with unit/month exposure; now at issue in Gomez v. Greystar Management Services, LLC (N.D. Cal.)

San Diego, CA
San Diego Mun. Code §§ 98.1101–98.1104 (effective June 2025)
Similar prohibition and private remedy of up to $1,000 per violation; now at issue in Keller v. UDR Inc., (S.D. Cal.).

Berkeley, CA
Berkeley Mun. Code ch. 13.63 (effective January 2026)
Prohibits coordinated pricing algorithms; recurring unit/month violations and private remedies, previously at issue in RealPage, Inc. v. City of Berkeley et al., (N.D. Cal.) (voluntarily dismissed with prejudice Jan. 14, 2026).

Santa Ana, CA
Santa Ana Ordinance No. NS-3090 (effective April 2, 2026)
Ordinance NS-3090 prohibits specified anticompetitive automated rent price-fixing; private tenant claims and up to $1,000 per violation and per month.

Philadelphia, PA
Phila. Code § 9-813 (effective February 2025)
Private remedies include treble actual damages or $2,000 per violation; now at issue in Liu v. Willow Bridge Property Co., et al., (Phila. C.P.).

Minneapolis, MN
Minneapolis Code of Ordinances § 244.2070 (effective March 2026)
Effective March 1, 2026. Prohibits algorithmic devices using nonpublic competitor data to advise on vacancy or rental rates; tenants may pursue civil actions.

Providence, RI
Providence Code of Ordinances ch. 13, art. X, §§ 13-69–13-73 (effective May 2025)
Prohibits the use of rent-setting algorithms; the city expressly linked the measure to software such as RealPage; now at issue in City of Providence v. Audubon Capital Partners, LLC, (Providence Mun. Ct.).

Jersey City, NJ
Jersey City Code § 218-12 (effective June 2025)
Prohibits a landlord’s use of algorithmic rent coordination services; includes public and private enforcement; fines up to $2,000 per day.

Hoboken, NJ
Hoboken City Code, ch. 158-2 (effective July 2025)
Prohibits landlords from using software, algorithms or data-sharing platforms to coordinate or recommend rents, lease terms, or occupancy.

Seattle, WA
Seattle Mun. Code ch. 7.34 (effective July 2025)
Prohibits specified coordinating services; penalties may reach $7,500 per violation; now at issue in Nicolas v. Essex Management Corp., et al., (W.D. Wash.) and Romano v. UDR, Inc., et al. (W.D. Wash.).

Many other municipal regulations remain pending, including in Montgomery County, Maryland; Evanston, Illinois; and Rhode Island.

Those changes may materially reduce prospective risk under many of the new municipal ordinances, but they do not necessarily eliminate litigation over past conduct. Several local laws became effective, many prohibiting use of coordination services or software even if secured prior to the effective date of the law, while landlords and software providers were still modifying their practices, and some ordinances treat each affected unit and each month of prohibited use as a separate violation.
