SOURCE: https://ecode360.com/36637822
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 23:15 UTC
CAPTURE: manual, built-in browser page text; blank lines removed (supplemental; manifest D071, link-only)

Chapter 2:10
Department of Economic and Housing Development
gavel
help_center
New
Laws
Title
Adopted
Subject
Affects
Ord. No. 6PSF-D, 09-09-2026  pdf
2026-09-09
Title II, Administration, Chapter 10, Development of Economic and Housing Development; amends § 2:10-7.2, Closing Cost Program
Ch 2:10
Editor's Note: The Department of Development, established by Ord. 6 S+FL(S-1), 7-16-1986, as amended by 6 S+FM, 9-17-1986; Ord. 6 S+FT, 12-8-1986; Ord. 6 S+FN, 1-7-1987; Ord. 6 S+FF, 1-21-1987; Ord. 6 S+FD, 7-13-1988; Ord. 6 S+FM, 11-14-1988; Ord. 6 S+FJ, 2-15-1989; Ord. 6 S+FB, 12-1-1993; Ord. 6 S+FP, 8-3-1994; Ord. 6 S+FE, 5-17-1995; Ord. 6 S+FH, 9-6-1995; Ord. 6 S+FX, 10-2-1996; Ord. 6 S+FJ, 11-17-1997; Ord. 6 S+FC, 8-5-1998 was repealed by Ord. 6 S+FB (S), 9-16-1998; Ord. 6 S+FE (S), 9-16-1998 created the Department of Economic and Housing Development.All the responsibilities and duties previously assigned the Division of the Office of Boards, the Central Planning Board, the Board of Adjustments and the Rent Control Board within the Department of Development (repealed by Ord. 6 S+FB(S), 9-16-1998) are now assigned to the Office of Boards, the Central Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment and the Rent Control Board respectively with the Department of Economic and Housing Development.Editor's Note: Division of Development Assistance established by Ord. 6 S+FL (S-1), 7-16-1986 replaced by Division of Economic Development. See Section 2:10-1.3.Editor's Note: Division of Demolition and Clearance established by Ord. 6 S+FL (S-1), 7-16-1986 abolished by Ord. 6 S+FM, 11-14-1988.
§ 2:10-1
ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AND HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
§ 2:10-1.1
Director of Economic and Housing Development; Divisions of the Department.
§ 2:10-1.2
Division of Housing Assistance; Manager; Duties.
§ 2:10-1.2A
through 2:10-1.2B. (Reserved)
§ 2:10-1.3
Division of Economic Development; Head; Duties.
§ 2:10-1.4
Division of Property Management; Head; Duties.
§ 2:10-1.4A
Abandoned Property Rehabilitation Act.
§ 2:10-1.4B
Abandoned Property List in the City of Newark.
§ 2:10-1.4C
City of Newark Senior Homeowner Emergency Repair Program.
§ 2:10-1.4C.1
Establishment and Summary of Program.
§ 2:10-1.4C.2
Eligibility.
§ 2:10-1.4C.3
Income Verification.
§ 2:10-1.4C.4
Types of Financial Assistance.
§ 2:10-1.4C.5
Eligibility Criteria for Property Improvements.
§ 2:10-1.4C.6
Authorization to Enter Into Contract.
§ 2:10-1.4C.7
Annual Report to Council.
§ 2:10-1.4D
Lease of City-Owned Vacant Lots for Gardening or Recreational Purposes.
§ 2:10-1.4E
MAINTENANCE OF VACANT PROPERTIES, REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS AND FEES.
§ 2:10-1.4E.1
Definitions.
§ 2:10-1.4E.2
General Requirements.
§ 2:10-1.4E.3
Registration Statement Requirements; Property Inspection.
§ 2:10-1.4E.4A
Residential Fee Schedule.
§ 2:10-1.4E.4B
Commercial Fee Schedule.
§ 2:10-1.4E.4C
Vacant Lot Fee Schedule.
§ 2:10-1.4E.5
Requirements for Owners of Vacant Property.
§ 2:10-1.4E.6
Exterior Protection.
§ 2:10-1.4E.7
Property Inspection.
§ 2:10-1.4E.8
Administration.
§ 2:10-1.4E.9
Enforcement.
§ 2:10-1.4E.10
Violations and Penalties.
§ 2:10-1.4E.11
Compliance with Other Provisions.
§ 2:10-1.4F
CARE, MAINTENANCE, SECURITY AND UPKEEP OF VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTIES ON WHICH A SUMMONS AND COMPLAINT IN AN ACTION TO FORECLOSURE HAS BEEN FILED.
§ 2:10-1.4F.1
Definitions.
§ 2:10-1.4F.2
Maintenance.
§ 2:10-1.4F.3
Notification of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 2:10-1.4F.4
Responsibility of Creditor, If Owner of a Residential Property Vacates or Abandons Property Subject to Foreclosure.
§ 2:10-1.4F.5
Repair by City.
§ 2:10-1.4F.6
Out-of-State Creditors.
§ 2:10-1.4F.7
Violations and Penalties.
§ 2:10-1.4G
REGISTRATION OF FORECLOSURE MORTGAGE PROPERTIES.
§ 2:10-1.4G.1
Definitions.
§ 2:10-1.4G.2
Inspection and Registration.
§ 2:10-1.4G.3
Maintenance Requirements.
§ 2:10-1.4G.4
Security Requirements.
§ 2:10-1.5
Division of City Planning; Head; Duties.
§ 2:10-1.6
Office of Boards; Head; Duties.
§ 2:10-1.7
Administrative Assignment of Central Planning Board.
§ 2:10-1.8
Administrative Assignment of Board of Adjustment.
§ 2:10-1.9
Administrative Assignment of Rent Control Board.
§ 2:10-1.10
Director to Serve Notice of Intent to Sell Contiguous Property to Adjacent Property Owners.
§ 2:10-2
CITY OF NEWARK MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES HOUSING ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
§ 2:10-2.1
Establishment.
§ 2:10-2.2
Minimum Requirements for the Program.
§ 2:10-2.3
Authorization to Execute Documents.
§ 2:10-2.4
Annual Report to Council.
§ 2:10-2.5
Funding.
§ 2:10-3
NEWARK LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
§ 2:10-3.1
Declaration of Purpose and Public Policy.
§ 2:10-3.2
Definitions.
§ 2:10-3.3
Commission Established.
§ 2:10-3.4
Membership.
§ 2:10-3.5
Terms and Vacancies.
§ 2:10-3.6
Rules and Organization.
§ 2:10-3.7
Administrative Officer.
§ 2:10-3.8
Expenses and Costs.
§ 2:10-3.9
Scope of Powers.
§ 2:10-4
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE CITYWIDE FACADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
§ 2:10-4.1
Program Established.
§ 2:10-4.2
Definitions.
§ 2:10-4.3
Eligible Areas and Funding Limitations.
§ 2:10-4.4
Eligible and Ineligible Activities.
§ 2:10-4.5
Loan Amount.
§ 2:10-4.6
Loan Terms.
§ 2:10-4.7
Default.
§ 2:10-4.8
Application Process.
§ 2:10-4.9
Facade Improvement Program Review Committee.
§ 2:10-4.10
Selection of Contractors.
§ 2:10-4.11
Right of Entry.
§ 2:10-4.12
Disbursement of Loans.
§ 2:10-4.13
Prevailing Wages.
§ 2:10-4.14
Insurance Requirements/Indemnification.
§ 2:10-4.15
Program Administration.
§ 2:10-4.16
Waiver of Mortgage Requirement.
§ 2:10-4.17
Annual Report to Council.
§ 2:10-4.18
Sunset Clause.
§ 2:10-5
CITY OF NEWARK SOUTH WARD REHABILITATION PROGRAM.
§ 2:10-6
(RESERVED)
§ 2:10-7
LIVE NEWARK LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAM FOR ADVANCING CLOSING COSTS OR PROVIDING FUNDING FOR ELIGIBLE FACADE IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 2:10-7.1
Renewal of the Live Newark Loan Forgiveness Program.
§ 2:10-7.2
Closing Costs Program.
§ 2:10-7.3
Facade Improvement Program.
§ 2:10-7.4
Terms Applicable to Loans Granted Under the Live Newark Loan Forgiveness Program.
§ 2:10-8
EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP LOAN AND LOAN GUARANTEE PROGRAM.
§ 2:10-8.0
Definitions.
§ 2:10-8.1
Establishment of an Employee Ownership Loan and Loan Guarantee Program.
§ 2:10-8.2
Employee Ownership Loans and Loan Guarantees.
§ 2:10-8.3
Budget.
§ 2:10-8.4
Employee Ownership Trusts.
§ 2:10-8.5
Minority-, Women-, and Veteran-Owned Business Certification.
§ 2:10-9
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEED RESTRICTION INCLUDED ON SALE OF UP TO FIFTY (50%) PERCENT OF THE CITY'S PROPERTY STOCK INCLUDING VACANT LAND.
§ 2:10-9.1
Purpose and Effect.
§ 2:10-9.2
Definitions.
§ 2:10-9.3
Adoption of Affordable Housing Restriction.
§ 2:10-9.4
Adoption of Rules and Regulations Governing Properties Subject to Affordable Housing Restriction.
§ 2:10-9.5
In Lieu of Payment.
§ 2:10-9.6
Right of First Refusal.
§ 2:10-9.7
Transfers Without City Approval.
§ 2:10-9.8
Exceptions.
§ 2:10-9.9
Landbank.
§ 2:10-10
HOMEOWNERSHIP REVITALIZATION PROGRAM.
§ 2:10-10.1
Program Established.
§ 2:10-10.2
Application.
§ 2:10-10.3
Selection Criteria.
§ 2:10-10.4
Requirements for Transfer of Properties.
§ 2:10-10.5
Sunset Provision.
§ 2:10-11
UNCONSCIONABLE RENT INCREASE.
§ 2:10-11.1
Definitions.
§ 2:10-1
ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AND HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
§ 2:10-1.1
Director of Economic and Housing Development; Divisions of the Department.
[Ord. 6 S+FE [S], 9-16-1998 § 2, 3; Ord. 6 S+FH, 4-7-2004 § 1]There shall be a Department of Economic and Housing Development, the head of which shall be the Director of Economic and Housing Development. The Director's compensation shall be such sum annually as shall be fixed by ordinance. The Department shall consist of the following Divisions:Housing Assistance.Economic Development.Property Management.City Planning; andOffice of Boards.The Director of Economic and Housing Development shall, prior to appointment, be qualified by education, training and experience in the process of the development of housing, commercial and industrial improvements within large urban areas.The Director, through the Divisions and otherwise, shall direct and supervise the functions necessary to assist and encourage the timely and proper improvement to real property within the City. These functions shall include at a minimum the acquisition of real property; the development of maps and standards governing the development of the City; the management, maintenance and operation of property owned by the City but not needed for public use; the disposition of such property by sale or lease and the operation and administration of such incentive programs as may be established by the City to assist and encourage the development of property; the management and coordination of the Newark Urban Enterprise Zone Program in accordance with the agreement with the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority.The Director shall be responsible for the periodic study of market rate and low income housing within the City of Newark and shall make recommendations to the Municipal Council a minimum price for the sale of city-owned real estate for the construction of low income and market rate housing units. Until such time the Director's recommendations are authorized by the Governing Body, the minimum sales price for the development of market rate housing on City-owned real estate shall be no less than $4 per square foot. The minimum sales price of City-owned real estate for the development of low or moderate income housing shall be no less than $2 per square foot. These prices shall be applicable to both nonprofit and for-profit entities alike.
§ 2:10-1.2
Division of Housing Assistance; Manager; Duties.
[Ord. 6 S+FE (S), 9-16-1998 § 4; Ord. 6 S+FB, 3-17-2004 § 1; Ord. 6 S+FD, 1-19-2005 § 1; Ord. 6 S+FH, 5-4-2005 § 1; 6 S+FB, 9-19-2007 § 1-5]There shall be within the Department of Economic and Housing Development a Division of Housing Assistance, the head of which shall be the Manager, Division of Housing Assistance.The Division of Housing Assistance, under the supervision of the Director of Economic and Housing Development, shall have the following duties:Serve as the housing assistance agency for the City and in so doing discharge the duties thereof.Administer all programs established by the Federal, State and City governments which pertain to neighborhood housing rehabilitation and/or residential housing construction.Provide such other assistance as is proper and necessary to permit and encourage the development of real property for residential purposes in a manner which is consistent with general law and local ordinances.City of Newark Predatory Lending Program.Establishment. The Division of Housing Assistance is authorized to establish a City of Newark Predatory Lending Program. The selection criteria and regulation for participation in the program by qualifying homeowner occupants shall be consistent with all terms, rules, and regulations established by the City of Newark and Department of Economic and Housing Development. Funding of this program is subject to the availability of funds.Summary of Program. The City of Newark Predatory Lending Program will provide each homeowner with a zero interest deferred-loan, in the amount of assistance required for a mortgage reduction. The amount of the mortgage reduction will be equivalent to the cost of home repairs that must be completed for the home to comply with all established City of Newark building codes. The City of Newark will partner with the Bank of New York, which will refinance the mortgage, administer the applicant qualification process and monitor all home repairs. In order to ensure repayment of the loan, a lien will be placed on the property in the amount of the loan. The lien must be signed by the homeowner(s) and recorded. Homeowners must also execute a promissory note. During the twenty-year period of affordability, the amount of the loan will become due and payable upon sale or transfer of title of the property by the homeowner. If during the twenty-year period of affordability, the homeowner sells or transfers title to an income qualified homebuyer, the lender may, at its discretion, require the loan to be repaid or continue to hold the lien against the property. After the twenty-year period of affordability has expired, the amount of the lien will be reduced by 10% at the end of each subsequent year. After 30 years from the date of initial purchase, the loan will be forgiven and the lien removed.Authorization to Enter into Contract. The Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development, or his designee, is authorized to enter into contracts, execute deeds or other necessary documents for participation in the City of Newark Predatory Lending Program with eligible Newark homeowner occupants upon their demonstration of compliance with all terms and regulations established by the Department of Economic and Housing Development. All contracts shall be attested by the City Clerk and approved as to form and legality by the Corporation Counsel.Annual Report to Council. The Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development shall provide the Municipal Council with an annual report by December 31 of each year identifying:Names and number of contracts entered into.The amount of said contracts.The property addresses for such contracts.Any additional requested information by the Municipal Council.City of Newark Neighborhood Rehabilitation Program.Establishment. The Division of Housing Assistance is authorized to establish a City Neighborhood Rehabilitation Program. The selection criteria and regulations for participation in the program by qualifying homeowner occupants shall be consistent with all terms, rules, and regulations established by the City of Newark's Department of Economic and Housing Development and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Funding of this program is subject to the availability of funds.Summary of Program. Any residential owner-occupied structure consisting of one to three dwelling units, and located in the City of Newark is eligible for participation in the Neighborhood Rehabilitation Program (NRP). Mixed use or nonresidential buildings are not eligible for treatment in this program.Type of Applicants. The applicant must be an owner/occupant of a residential property in the City of Newark and the household must meet the HUD definition of a low/moderate income household. (The definition of very-low and low income household is a household with an income that does not exceed 80% of the median income for Essex County.)Eligible participants must be the owner(s) of record at the time of application submission. For-profit corporations, nonprofit corporations, partnerships, etc., are ineligible for participation in this program.Income Verification. Income verification shall be based upon the applicant's current income as reported as "Adjusted Income" on the Federal Income Tax 1040/1040A or addendum award letters or verification from any entities providing fixed income including Social Security, pension, disability or death benefits. "Income" shall be defined as the total combined earnings of all household members. "Household members" mean all persons who share the owner/occupant's dwelling unit.Types of Financial Assistance and Periods of Affordability.Periods of Affordability. Assistance to NRP eligible applicants will be funded with HOME Program Funds. Any HOME assisted unit must meet the affordability requirements for not less than the applicable period specified in the table listed below, beginning after project completion. The affordability requirements apply without regard to the term of any loan or mortgage or the transfer of ownership. The City of Newark will insure compliance with its affordability requirements by placing a deed restriction on the treated property. Such deed restriction will remain in effect until the affordability period has been satisfied.Amount of AffordabilityControl Funds Awarded Period$0- $14,9995-Years$15,000 - $40,00010-YearsOver $40,00015-YearsAs stated above, HOME-assisted units must be occupied only by households that are eligible low-income families and must meet the following requirements to qualify as affordable housing.Rent Limitations. HUD provides the following maximum HOME rent limits. The maximum HOME rents are the lesser of:The fair market rent for existing housing for comparable units in the area as established by HUD under 24 CFR 888.111; orA rent that does not exceed 30% of the adjusted income of a family whose annual income equals 65% of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for number of bedrooms in the unit. The HOME rent limits provided by HUD will include average occupancy per unit and adjusted income assumptions.Initial Rent Schedule and Utility Allowances. The City of Newark has established monthly allowances for utilities and services (excluding telephone). The DHA must review and approve rents proposed by the owner for units subject to the maximum rent limitations in paragraph c,l or 2 or this subsection. For all units subject to the maximum rent limitations in paragraph c,1 or 2 of this subsection for which the tenant is paying utilities and services, the DHA must ensure rents do not exceed the maximum rent minus the monthly allowances for utilities and services.Nondiscrimination Against Rental Assistance Subsidy Holders. The owner cannot refuse to lease HOME-assisted units to a certificate or voucher holder under 24 CFR part 982-Section 8 Tenant-Based Assistance: Unified Rule for Tenant-Based Assistance under the Section 8 Rental Certificate Program and the Section 8 Rental Voucher Program or to the holder of a comparable document evidencing participation in a HOME tenant-based rental assistance program because of the status of the prospective tenant as a holder of such certificate, voucher or comparable HOME tenant-based assistance document.Subsequent Rents During the Affordability Period. The maximum HOME rent limits are recalculated on a periodic basis after HUD determines fair market rents and median incomes. HUD then provides the new maximum HOME rent limits to the City of Newark. Regardless of changes in fair market rents and in median income over time, the HOME rents for a project are not required to be lower than the HOME rent limits for the project in effect at the time of project commitment.The City of Newark must provide homeowner(s) with information on updated HOME rent limits so that rents may be adjusted (not to exceed the maximum HOME rent limits described above).Any increase in rents for HOME assisted units is subject to the provisions of outstanding leases, and in any event, the owner must provide tenants of those units not less than 30 days prior written notice before implementing any increase in rents.Adjustment of HOME Rent Limits.Changes in fair market rents and in median income over time should be sufficient to maintain the financial viability of a project within the HOME rent limits.HUD may adjust the HOME rent limit only if HUD finds that an adjustment is necessary to support the continued financial viability of the project and only by an amount that HUD determines is necessary to maintain continued financial viability of the project. This authority will be used sparingly.Tenant Income. The income of each .tenant must be determined initially in accordance with 92.203(a)(l)(i). In addition, each year during the period of affordability the homeowner(s) must reexamine each tenant's annual income in accordance with one of the options in 92.203 selected by the City of Newark. A homeowner(s) with an affordability period of 10 years or more who reexamines tenant's annual income through a statement and certification in accordance with 92.203(a)(l)(ii), must examine the income of each tenant, in accordance with 92.203(a)(l)(i), every sixth year of the affordability period. Otherwise, the homeowner(s) who accepts the tenant's statement and certification in accordance with 92.203(a)(l)(ii) is not required to examine the income of tenants in multifamily or single­ family projects unless there is evidence the tenant's written statement failed to completely and accurately state information about the family's size of income.Over-Income Tenants. HOME-assisted units continue to qualify as affordable housing despite a temporary noncompliance caused by increases in the incomes of existing tenants if actions satisfactory to HUD and the City of Newark are being taken to ensure that all vacancies are filled in accordance with this section until the noncompliance is corrected.Tenants who no longer qualify as low-income families must pay as rent the lesser of the amount payable by the tenant under State or local law or 30% of the family's adjusted income, except that tenants of HOME-assisted units that have been allocated low-income housing tax credits by a housing credit agency pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 42) must pay rent governed by section 42. In addition, in projects that HOME units are designated as floating pursuant to paragraph j, tenants who no longer qualify as low-income are not required to pay as rent an amount that exceeds the market rent for comparable, unassisted units in the neighborhood.Fixed and Floating HOME Units. In a project containing HOME-assisted and other units, the City of Newark may designate fixed or floating HOME units. This designation must be made at the time of project commitment. Fixed units remain the same throughout the period of affordability. Floating units are changed to maintain conformity with the requirements of this section during the affordability so the total number of housing units meeting the requirements of this section remains the same, and each substituted unit is comparable in terms of size, features, and number of bedrooms to the originally designated HOME­ assisted units.Tenant and Participant Protections.Lease. The lease between a tenant and an owner(s) of rental housing assisted with HOME funds must be for not less than one year, unless by mutual agreement between the tenant and the owner(s).Prohibited Lease Terms. The lease between the tenant and the owner(s) may not contain any of the provisions listed in CFR 92.253.Senior Applicants — Amount of Awarded Funds.$1,000 - $14,999. The applicant(s) will receive a five-year deferred loan. This loan will be prorated over the five-year period. Should the applicant(s) reside in the property for the entire period of affordability, the deferred loan will revert to a grant and the DHA will remove the lien from the property. Should the homeowner(s) sell the property within the affordability period, the prorated balance must be repaid to the City when the property is sold.Should a senior homeowner(s) receive $15,000 or more, the deferred loan will be prorated over the applicable period of affordability. Should the applicant(s) reside in the property for the entire period of affordability, the deferred loan will revert to a grant and the DHA will remove the lien from the property. Should the homeowner(s) sell the property within the affordability period, the prorated balance must be repaid to the City when the property is sold. Then, the DHA will remove the lien from the property.Non-Senior Applicants. A non-senior applicant, whose income is less than 80% of the median income for a family in Newark (based on United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) adjusted home income limits), will be provided a deferred payment loan based on the following:Amount of Awarded Program Funds.All Dollar Amounts. The applicant(s) will receive a deferred loan for the duration of the period of affordability. This loan will be prorated over the required number of years. Should the homeowner(s) reside in the property for the entire period of affordability, the homeowner(s) must repay the City 50% of the deferred loan at 0% interest. Once the loan balance has been paid to the City of Newark, the DHA will remove the lien from the property. Should the homeowner(s) sell the property within the affordability period, 100% of the deferred loan must be repaid to the City, along with interest (3% simple interest for homeowners that repay upon sale prior to the end of the affordability control period). The lien will remain on the property until payment is received by the City.Eligibility Requirements. Applicants shall be eligible to participate in the NRP only if they meet the program income eligibility requirements. Municipal property taxes, water bills, mortgage payments and property insurance must be current at the time the applicant(s) apply to this program. A DHA employee shall verify the payment status of each applicant's above-listed accounts with the City, mortgage company and insurance company. These accounts must have a current payment status, or the applicant must have a payment agreement with the City of Newark.Each applicant must also submit to the DHA a copy of the hazard insurance policy for the subject property. This hazard insurance must state the insurance will remain in full force throughout their participation in the NRP.Eligibility Criteria for Property Improvements. Rehabilitation under the NRP is restricted to cover building facade treatments and deficiencies that are categorized as Mandatory Code Violations. Mandatory Code Violations are defined as those "defective" systems within a building that jeopardize the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants. The abatement of these items must be deemed necessary, based upon City and State health codes. At least one code violation must exist at the homeowner's property. Facade improvements include exterior painting, window replacement and aluminum siding. The replacement of damaged sidewalks is also an eligible repair item under this NRP.The Department reserves the final judgment on all items being considered for rehabilitation. Modifications of these rehabilitation guidelines can only be made by the Department of Economic and Housing Development.Authorization to Enter into Contract. The Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development, or his designee, is authorized to enter into contracts, execute deeds or other necessary documents for participation in the Neighborhood Rehabilitation Program with eligible Newark homeowner occupants upon their demonstration of compliance with all terms and regulations established by the Department of Economic and Housing Development and the City of Newark. All contracts shall be attested by the City Clerk and approved as to form and legality by the Corporation Counsel.Annual Report to Council. The Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development shall provide the Municipal Council with an annual report by December 31 of each year identifying:Names and number of contracts entered into.The amount of said contracts.The property addresses for such contracts.Any additional requested information by the Municipal Council.Federal HOME and ADDI Programs.Establishment. The Division of Housing Assistance is authorized to establish City of Newark Federal HOME and ADDI Programs. The selection criteria and regulations for participation in these programs by qualifying homebuyers shall be consistent with all terms, rules, and regulations established by the Federal Government and the Department of Economic and Housing Development. Funding of these programs is subject to the availability of funds.Authorization to Enter into Contract. The Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development, or his designee, is authorized to enter into contracts, execute deeds or other necessary documents for participation in City HOME and ADDI Programs with qualified first-time homebuyers upon their demonstration of financial capability and compliance with all other terms and regulations established by the Department of Economic and Housing Development. All contracts shall be attested by the City Clerk and approved as to form and legality by the Corporation Counsel. For HOME Program funds, Municipal Council approval and execution of an Affordable Housing Agreement (i.e., a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions of the HOME Program) between the project sponsor/developer and the Mayor and the Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development shall be a precondition of any authorization to enter into contracts or other necessary documents with qualified first-time homebuyers.Annual Report to Council. The Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development shall prepare an annual report by December 31 of each year identifying:Names and number of contracts entered into.The amount of said contracts.The property addresses for such contracts.Any additional requested information by the Municipal Council.
§ 2:10-1.2A
through 2:10-1.2B. (Reserved)
[1]
[1]Editor's Note: Former subsections 2:10-1.2A, Minimum Price for the Sale of City-Owned Real Estate and 2:10-1.2B, Exceptions for Environmental Remediation, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 6 S+FB, 5-21-2003 were repealed in their entirety by Ordinance No. 6 S+FH, 4-7-2004.
§ 2:10-1.3
Division of Economic Development; Head; Duties.
[Ord. 6 S+FE (S), 9-16-1998 § 5]There shall be within the Department of Economic and Housing Development, a Division of Economic Development, the head of which shall be the Manager, Division of Economic Development.The Division of Economic Development, under the supervision of the Director of Economic and Housing Development, shall have the following duties:Administer all programs established by the City to encourage the construction, reconstruction or rehabilitation of commercial and industrial property.Provide such other assistance as is proper and necessary to permit and encourage the development of real property for commercial and industrial purposes in a manner which is consistent with general law and local ordinance.The Division of Economic Development is authorized to establish the "Revolving Loan Program". The selection criteria and regulations for participants in either program shall be established by the Division. A copy of the regulations and any subsequent amendments thereto shall be placed on file with the City Clerk by the Manager of the Division.Authorization to Enter Into Contract. The Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development is authorized to enter into contracts with qualified borrowers upon their demonstration of financial capability and compliance with all other terms and regulations established by the Division of Economic Development. The contracts shall be attested by the City Clerk and approved as to legality and form by the Corporation Counsel.Annual Report to Council. The Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development shall provide the Municipal Council with an annual report identifying:The number of loans made;The amount of the loans;The areas and types of businesses provided such loans; andThe number of minority benefits for such loans.Monitor adherence to the contractual terms between the Newark Urban Enterprise Zone and the N.J. Urban Enterprise Zone Authority, and to establish and maintain a financial management system consistent with the contract.
§ 2:10-1.4
Division of Property Management; Head; Duties.
[Ord. 6 S+FE(S), 9-16-1998; Ord. 6 PSF-B, 11-1-2017]There shall be within the Department of Economic and Housing Development a Division of Property Management, the head of which shall be the Manager, Division of Property Management.The Division of Property Management, under the supervision of the Deputy Mayor/Director of the Department of Economic and Housing Development shall have the following duties:Maintain a complete registry of all real property owned by the City, including information as to its use and condition, as well as on leaseholds and other encumbrances thereon.Manage the maintenance and operation of all real property owned by the City which is not needed for Municipal use.Recommend, within the scope of general law, local ordinance, and administrative policy, those properties to be offered for sale or lease and the terms and conditions of such offerings.Conduct the administrative process necessary to carry out the sale or lease of real property where such has been duly authorized.Serve as the redevelopment agency for the City, and in so doing discharge the duties thereof.Pursuant to P.L. 1988, Chapter 584, there is hereby established within the Division of Property Management an "Urban Homestead Program." The Division is designated as the Homesteading Agency to administer the program. The selection criteria and regulations for participation in the program shall be established by the Division. A copy of the regulations and any subsequent amendments thereto shall be placed on file with the City Clerk by the Manager of the Division of Property Management.Minimum Requirements of the Program:The minimum purchase price shall be $500 and the maximum purchase price shall be $5,000.Buyers must be Newark residents and must commit to reside in the properties for a minimum of seven years.Rehabilitation of the property must commence within three months after acquiring title and all work must be completed within 12 months thereafter.Selection shall be on a first come first-serve basis (limited to 12 applicants per property). Only one property may be submitted at a time by an applicant.The applicant shall as part of their application submit three independent appraisals from general contractors outlining the rehabilitation cost and work required in order to bring the property into conformance with all applicable State and local codes.Title to the property shall revert back to the City of Newark in the event the purchaser fails to close title, commence or complete the rehabilitation within the time periods, meet the residence requirements, and fulfill the work required in the appraisal selected by the Division of Property Management.All conveyances shall be accomplished through a contract sale which contract shall be approved by the Municipal Council.The Division shall have the responsibility for monitoring the properties to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Section 2:10-1.4.The applicant shall submit proof of acquisition financing and shall demonstrate the financial means to repair and/or rehabilitate the property. Proof of financial capability shall include, but not be limited to, the purchaser's own personal finances, a bank loan, and a commitment from lender to finance construction sufficient to bring the property up to City code standards.Source of Rehabilitation Funds: Personal, bank, mortgage company, State or other financial sources. Basic eligibility determined by gross annual household income to participate in the Homestead Rehabilitation Program. Income includes, but is not limited to, salary, wages, alimony, social security benefits, pension, business income and actual or imputed earning assets which include bank accounts, stocks, bonds or other securities.Source of Financing Acquisition of Property: Must demonstrate ability to acquire property through savings accounts or other liquid assets.All other provisions of the rules and regulations promulgated by the Division of Property Management shall be consistent with the provisions of P.L. 1988, Chapter 584.
§ 2:10-1.4A
Abandoned Property Rehabilitation Act.
[1]
[Ord. 6 SF-C, 11-22-2010]Definitions.ABANDONED PROPERTY (CRITERIA PURSUANT TO N.J.S.A. 55:19-83) — Shall mean any property that is determined to be abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) as follows:Property must not have been legally occupied for six months and must meet any one of the criteria in subsection a,1(a) through (d) in this section.Property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment of the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during that six-month period.Construction was initiated and discontinued prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy, and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the date of determination that the building is abandoned.At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and delinquent as of the date of determination.The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public officer as defined in this section.Exceptions to abandoned property.A property on which an entity other than the municipality holds a tax sale certificate is not deemed to be abandoned if the owner of the certificate (1) continues to pay all municipal taxes and liens when due; and (2) initiates foreclosure proceedings within six months after the property is eligible for foreclosure.A property used on a seasonal basis is deemed to be abandoned only if it meets any two of the criteria listed in paragraphs 1.(a) through (d) above.CITY — Shall mean the City of Newark.DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.LIEN HOLDER OR MORTGAGE HOLDER — Shall mean any person or entity holding a note, mortgage or other interest secured by the building or any part thereof.NUISANCE (CRITERIA PURSUANT TO N.J.S.A. 55:19-82) — Shall mean any property that is determined by the public officer to be a nuisance if any one of the following applies:The property is found to be unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3.The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties.The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the property; or the municipality has secured the property in order to prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to do so.The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds have created potential health and safety hazards and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remove the hazards; orThe dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property materially affects including the economic welfare, of the residents of the area in close proximity to the property, and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remedy the conditions.OWNER — Shall mean the holder or holders of title to an abandoned property.PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean a person designated by the Mayor and who is authorized and directed to identify abandoned properties within the City of Newark, place said properties on an abandoned property list established as provided in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c.62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), as amended by Section 28 of P.L. 2003, c. 210.QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — Shall mean an entity organized or authorized to do business under the New Jersey statutes which shall have as one of its purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential or nonresidential buildings, the provision of affordable housing, the restoration of abandoned property, the revitalization and improvement of urban neighborhoods, or similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified by virtue of its staff, professional consultants, financial resources, and prior activities set forth in P.L. 2003, c.10 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) to carry out the rehabilitation of vacant buildings in urban areas.Inventory of Abandoned Property; List to be Maintained; Publication in Official Newspaper; Notice to Owner of Record; Challenge by Owner (from N.J.S.A. 55:19-55). The City may direct the public officer to identify abandoned property for the purpose of establishing an abandoned property list throughout the City, or within those parts of the City the Governing Body may designate. Each item of abandoned property so identified shall include the tax block and lot number, the name of the owner of record, if known, and the street address of the lot.The public officer shall establish and maintain a list of abandoned property, to be known as the "abandoned property list." The City may add properties to the abandoned property list at any time, and may delete properties at any time when the public officer finds that the property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned property. An interested party may request that a property be included on the abandoned property list following that procedure set forth in Section 31 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (C.55:19-105).An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which an entity other than the City has purchased or taken assignment from the City of a tax sale certificate which has been placed on the abandoned property list may be removed in accordance with the provisions of Section 29 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (C.55:19-103).The public officer shall establish the abandoned property list or any additions thereto by publication in the official newspaper of the City of Newark, which publication shall constitute public notice, and, within 10 days after publication, shall send a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, to the owner of record of every property included on the list. The published and mailed notices shall identify property determined to be abandoned setting forth the owner of record, if known, the tax lot and block number and street address. The public officer, in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also send out a notice by regular and certified mail to any mortgagee, servicing organization, or property tax processing organization that receives a duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to subsection d of N.J.S.A. 54:4-64. When the owner of record is not known for a particular property and cannot be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be mailed but instead shall be posted on the property in the manner as provided in Section 5 of P.L. 1942, c.112 (C. 40:48-2.7). The mailed notice shall indicate the factual basis for the public officer's finding that the property is abandoned property as that term is defined in Section 35 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (C.55:19-54) and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, specifying the information relied upon in making such finding. In all cases a copy of the mailed or posted notice shall also be filed by the public officer in the office of the Essex County Clerk or Register of Deeds and Mortgages. This filing shall have the same force and effect as a notice of lis pendens under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be indexed by the name of the property owner as defendant and the name of the City as plaintiff, as though an action had been commenced by the City against the owner.An owner or lien holder may challenge the inclusion of his property on the abandoned property list determined pursuant to subsection b,2 of this section by appealing that determination to the public officer within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the certified notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice was sent. An owner whose identity was not known to the public officer shall have 40 days from the date upon which notice was published or posted, whichever is later, to challenge the conclusion of a property on the abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the public officer shall accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30 days of receipt of a request for an appeal of the finding contained in the notice pursuant to subsection b,4 of this section, the public officer shall schedule a hearing for redetermination of the matter. Any property included on the list shall be presumed to be abandoned property unless the owner, through the submission of an affidavit or certification by the property owner averring that the property is not abandoned and stating the reasons for such averment, can demonstrate that the property was erroneously included on the list. The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by supporting documentation; such as but not limited to photographs, and repair invoices, bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal shall be that the property in question is not abandoned property as that term is defined in Section 35 of P.L. 1996, c.62 (C.55:19-54). The public officer shall decide any timely filed appeal within 10 days of the hearing on the appeal and shall promptly, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, notify the property owner of the decision and the reasons therefor.The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an appeal with the public officer pursuant to subsection b,4 of this section, by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court of Rules, a summary proceeding in the Superior Court, Law Division, sitting in Essex County, which action shall be tried de novo. Such action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of notice of decision mailed by the public officer pursuant to subsection b,4 of this section. The sole ground for appeal shall be that the property in question is not abandoned property as that term is defined in Section 35 of P.L. 1996, c.62(C.55:19-54). The failure to institute an action of appeal on a timely basis shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse determination, except that, for good cause shown, the Court may extend the deadline for instituting the action.The public officer shall promptly remove any property from the abandoned property list that has been determined not to be abandoned on appeal.The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the City of Newark shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect to properties on the abandoned property list at such time as any one property has been placed on the list in accordance with the provisions of this section, upon the expiration of the period for appeal with respect to the property or upon the denial of an appeal brought by the property owner.Sale of Tax Lien on Abandoned Property; Remediation Costs (Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56).Notwithstanding N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or the provisions of any other law to the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned property list and the property taxes or other City liens due on the property are delinquent six or more quarters as of the date of expiration of the right to appeal inclusion on the list, or, if an appeal has been filed, as of the date that all opportunities for appeal of inclusion on the list have been exhausted, then the tax lien on the property may be sold in accordance with the procedures in the "tax sale law," N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq., on or after the 90th day following the expiration of that time of appeal or final determination on an appeal, as appropriate. The City may, at its option, require that the sale of the tax sale certificate or any subsequent assignment or transfer of a tax sale certificate held by the City be subject to the express condition that the purchaser or assignee shall be obliged to perform and conclude any rehabilitation or repairs necessary to remove the property from the abandoned property list pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c.62 (C.55-19-55) and to post a bond in favor of the City to guarantee the rehabilitation or repair of the property. The public officer may waive a requirement to post a bond imposed by the City for any purchaser, assignee or transferee of a tax sale certificate that provides documentation acceptable to the public officer that the purchaser, assignee or transferee is a qualified rehabilitation entity as defined in Section 3 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (C.55:19-80). The cost of rehabilitation and repairs and the cost of the bond shall be added to the amount required to be paid by the owner for redemption of the property. The purchaser, assignee or transferee of the tax sale certificate who is required to rehabilitate and repair the property shall be required to file the appropriate affidavits with the Tax Collector, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-62, representing the amounts of monies expended periodically toward the rehabilitation or repair of the property. A purchaser, assignee or transferee shall be
[truncated to 60000 chars]
